feat: 🎸 Post about Side-Projects (#105)
Bootstragram/bootstragram-blog: _posts/2022-12-12-side-projects-2022.md

---
layout: post
id: E629FACC-8499-4402-B03B-0F5DB13396BD

> title: The Sparking Joy of Side-Projects, 2022 Edition

Reviewer: The Joy Sparked by Side Projects

author: Mick F
excerpt: >-
  Reviewing 2022, the benefits I gained from running a newsletter as a

>   side-project are tremendous. Let me explain why.

Reviewer: I think you can just write "side project" without a hyphen

category: Journaling
tags:
  - Swift
  - iOS
  - JavaScript
  - React
---

> 🎄 December is here! Like every year, it is time to watch _Home Alone_ again and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
🎄 December is here! Like every December, it is time to watch _Home Alone_ again and
```

Author: I didn't want to repeat `December`. What is wrong with `year`? What else can I say to not repeat `December`?

> for a review of the progress I made as a developer in the past 12 months.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to review the progress I made as a developer over the past 12 months.
```

> Side-projects contributed the most.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Side projects contributed the most.
```

> ## Why side-projects are necessary to me

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Why side projects are necessary for me
```

> Yes, a paying job is your bread and butter. But having a side-project is key to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Yes, a paying job is your bread and butter. But having a side project is key to
```

> stay ahead of the younger guns of the tech world, flexing your developer muscles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
staying ahead of the younger guns of the tech world, flexing your developer muscles
```

in new directions and anticipating what’s next for you at work.

Last year, I started writing [a newsletter about soccer/football][1][^1] for

> people based in France. The content is pretty basic. Still, I learnt so much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
people based in France. The content is pretty basic. Still, I learned so much
```

just setting it up, running it, and trying to automate as many steps as possible
so that each edition would take as little time as possible to write, without

> compromising on its value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compromising the quality of the content.
```

## Things I learned

> Here is a non-exhaustive list of the things I trained on last year to run that

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is a non-exhaustive list of the things I trained on last year to run the
```

newsletter, in an approximative chronological order:

- [**Swift Argument Parser.**][3] Writing a CLI in Swift is now my goto

>   direction when I need to write scripts. Including at work. It is so much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  solution when I need to write scripts. Including at work. It is so much
```

  easier to write, document and maintain than Shell scripts.
- [**Buttondown.**][4] This is an indie tool to bootstrap newsletters. As part

>   of the side-project journey, I always thought it was worth exploring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  of the side project journey, I believe it is worth exploring
```

  alternatives to big corporations so I skipped Mailchimp, Mailjet and similar

>   options. While I really like it, I think the newsletter is now ready to grow

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  options. While I really like Buttondown, I think the newsletter is now ready to grow
```

  out of it, and finding a better option for my needs is on the roadmap
  for 2023.
- [**Linode.**][5] Similarly, I didn’t want to go the AWS route. Since I
  started, Linode got bought by Akamai so I am not as attached to it as I was.

>   Much clearer than AWS still.

Reviewer: what does this mean? You still prefer it?

Author: I guess so. Yay, I'll try to rephrase to make it clearer.

  instances, manage DNS for the domain names, create and manage buckets and
  keys.
- [**iCalendar RFC.**][7] Not the sexiest subject. But I had to reverse-engineer
  how calendar software behaves to get the newsletter to work the way I wanted.
  Did you know that the iOS calendar behaves differently if you serve an ICS
  file with a 2XX HTTP status code than if you serve it via a 3XX? [I did
  not][8].
- [**JSONFeed.**][9] An alternative to RSS written in JSON.
- [**Micro.blog.**][10] An alternative to Twitter. Duh.
- **Modern React web frameworks.** I explored [Next.js][11] first, then
  [Remix][12]. Both are pretty amazing.
- [**DocC.**][13] The new documentation framework by Apple. I used [Jazzy][20]
  before, but DocC — albeit sometimes awkward to use — is much more complete. As
  illustrated by [Simon Støvring's talk during FrenchKit 2022][i1], you can
  create amazing documentation with it.
- [**Xcode Cloud.**][14] First-party CI and automated distribution of apps. It
  seems to cover some common ground with Fastlane, very convenient to distribute
  the app I use to run the newsletter on my iPhone and iPad via TestFlight.

> - [**TabularData.**][15] A new framework provided by Apple to organize, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [**TabularData.**][15] A new framework provided by Apple to organize and
```

  explore data.
- [**SwiftUI.**][16] I am sure you heard of it already 😉.
- [**The Composable Architecture.**][17] A 3rd-party architecture library that
  solved all the problems that were holding me back when I first got my toes wet
  with SwiftUI.
- [**OR-Tools library.**][18] Linear optimization library available in Python
  among others. Picking the right tools to do the right job is essential. I
  found this library to act like a Microsoft Excel solver.

Each of these tools would deserve their own post. I shouldn't run out of
inspiration for this blog next year.

## The positive impacts on my paying job

### 🧰 A better set of tools I can use

Part of my job at Memo Bank is to write the iOS app that serves as the 2FA for

> critical operations. It does not do much. But the things it does are critical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
critical operations. The app does not do much. But the things it does are critical.
```

> Our customers depend on it to pay salaries to their employees, pay taxes in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our customers depend on it to pay salaries to their employees, pay taxes on
```

time, and be safe with their transactions.

> The app was boostrapped with a compatibility going up to iOS 12. Now that I got

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The app was bootstrapped with compatibility going up to iOS 12. Now that I got
```

my hands dirty with SwiftUI and _The Composable Architecture_ on my

> side-projects, I feel comfortable adopting them in the app for upcoming

Reviewer: ```suggestion
side projects, I feel comfortable adopting them in the app for upcoming
```

features. That would not have been the case without the time I spent toying with

> them. I made many mistakes. I rewrote things multiple times. It is part of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
them outside of work. I made many mistakes. I rewrote things multiple times. It is part of
```

learning.

Could this time spent on my free time have been part of the job? Maybe. But I

> also like not having to be held accountable for anything when I toy with things.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also like not having to be held accountable for anything when I explore and want to play around with new things.
```

me. I am in complete control of every decision. Freedom & Fun.

### 🤗 A greater empathy

> “It should be easy, it is _just_ a button.”
>
> — Quite probably my past self, in a self-indulgent micro-agression towards
> some designer from my team. Who the hell did I think I was?

I wear every possible hat running this newsletter. I am a developer, a product
manager, and a designer. I do customer support, manage the infrastructure, etc.

I get a glimpse of the struggles that every job comes with. I get reminded that
good design is hard to get right, that keeping an infrastructure up takes
effort, that making product decisions is hard. It is a useful humbling reminder
that shit is hard to get right.

## My tips and life lessons

**🧱 Use a monorepo.** Over time, I realized that using a monorepo for my
projects was much more thrilling than having a million bunny projects with 5
commits each. The feeling of progress is much more satisfying.

**🏎 Take shortcuts towards the fun.** If you host your code on GitHub, don't use
an organization and don't open-source what you are doing until you feel ready.
For instance, at work, you should never leave secrets in your code. On a

> side-project, why not? If stakes are low, leave the boring requirerd things you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
side project, why not? If stakes are low, leave the boring required things you
```

write at work behind and sprint towards the fun parts.

**⏱ How to find time for it?** Any opportunity is good to take. My wife agreed
to leave me off kids-duty on Thursday evenings. I try to write a little bit of
code everyday, and when you work remotely, the lunch break is ideal for that.

> Over time, things build up and the output you get from a 5 minutes slot grows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over time, things build up and the output you get from a 5-minute slot grows.
```

Also, I recommend reading [these tips from Antoine van der Lee][19]. They are
great to act as a guard rail against uncontrollable impulses to try this new
thing. His point is to keep focus, realistic expecations and priorities
straight.

## Conclusion

> Why are you still reading this? Go work on your side-project!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why are you still reading this? Go work on your side project!
```
